README.md, before:

# Victron BLE to MQTT Integration

This repository provides working examples and templates for integrating Victron Smart devices (e.g., MPPTs, SmartShunts) using [victron-ble2mqtt](https://github.com/Louisvdw/victron-ble2mqtt). These examples allow for forwarding Victron data to your platform of choice such as Home Assistant, Node-RED, or others.

## ⚠️ Compatibility and Scope

* Confirmed working with Victron 75/15 MPPTs, Victron SmartShunt, and Venus OS running on Raspberry Pi.
* Current integrations include:

  * Home Assistant (via MQTT dashboard)
  * Node-RED (via MQTT flow)
  * Refoss Smart Energy Monitor (via native Home Assistant integration)

## 📁 Dashboard Directory

All dashboard files are located under the `dashboards/` folder.

## 🧩 Dashboard JSON Files

### Home Assistant

* **Path:** `dashboards/home_assistant_mqtt.json`
* **Description:** Imports into Home Assistant's MQTT dashboard to visualize Victron Smart device data.
* 📝 *Comment inside JSON marks where to replace MAC address.*

### Node-RED

* **Path:** `dashboards/nodered_victron_flow.json`
* **Description:** Full Node-RED flow to subscribe to Victron MQTT topics and build your own dashboard or automations.

> Replace MAC addresses or topic filters as needed inside these files. Look for comment markers `# REPLACE_ME`.

## 🔧 Setup

### Step 1: Clone This Repo

```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/curtalfrey/victron-ble2mqtt-integration.git
cd victron-ble2mqtt-integration
```

### Step 2: Edit `user_settings.py`

```bash
nano setup/user_settings.py
```

Make sure to:

* Replace MAC addresses with your actual Victron device MACs
* Modify MQTT settings if needed

### Step 3: Configure `victron_ble2mqtt.service`

```bash
sudo cp setup/victron_ble2mqtt.service /etc/systemd/system/victron_ble2mqtt.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable victron_ble2mqtt.service
sudo systemctl start victron_ble2mqtt.service
```

### Step 4: Import Dashboards

* For Home Assistant, use the GUI to import `home_assistant_mqtt.json`
* For Node-RED, open the Node-RED UI and import `nodered_victron_flow.json` via the editor

## ✅ Fix for Common `user_settings.toml` Error

If `user_settings.toml` is not being loaded or is causing errors, skip it completely and use `user_settings.py`. This repo provides a verified working `user_settings.py` that eliminates TOML-related issues.

## 🔌 Refoss Smart Energy Monitor Integration

**Supported models:**

* Refoss Smart Energy Monitor EM06 (firmware v2.3.8+)
* Refoss Smart Energy Monitor EM16 (firmware v3.1.7+)

**Integration steps:**

1. Ensure the Refoss device is on the same LAN as your Home Assistant instance.
2. In Home Assistant, go to **Settings → Devices & Services → Add Integration → Refoss**.
3. Home Assistant will auto-discover the device and create energy monitoring entities (e.g., current, voltage, power per channel).
4. These entities can be used in dashboards and automations, combined with Victron data.

> 📝 Refoss integration is entirely local and does not rely on cloud services.

## 📌 Keywords for Searchability

```
victron-ble2mqtt not working
victron user_settings.toml error
victron_ble2mqtt.service fix
victron ble mqtt node-red
victron mqtt home assistant
refoss smart energy home assistant local
refoss em06 mqtt integration
victron ble2mqtt raspberry pi setup
victron smartshunt mqtt example
victron mppt mqtt dashboard
victron mqtt integration node-red home assistant
victron ble2mqtt user_settings.py example
victron mqtt troubleshooting guide
refoss em16 energy monitor local integration
refoss home assistant no cloud
victron refoss energy dashboard
combine victron and refoss in home assistant
victron ble2mqtt systemd config error
victron ble2mqtt service not starting
```

## 🔐 Notes on Privacy

* All user-specific info like usernames have been scrubbed.
* Replace any placeholders with your actual values before deploying.

---

### Contributions Welcome

Submit a PR if you'd like to share other dashboards (e.g., for Grafana, InfluxDB, etc.)

---

© 2025 Curt Alfrey | [alfaqd.com](https://alfaqd.com)

Commit message:

Add instructions to README for creating user_settings.py from example file

README.md, after:

# Victron BLE to MQTT Integration

This repository provides working examples and templates for integrating Victron Smart devices (e.g., MPPTs, SmartShunts) using [victron-ble2mqtt](https://github.com/Louisvdw/victron-ble2mqtt). These examples allow for forwarding Victron data to your platform of choice such as Home Assistant, Node-RED, or others.

## ⚠️ Compatibility and Scope

* Confirmed working with Victron 75/15 MPPTs, Victron SmartShunt, and Venus OS running on Raspberry Pi.
* Current integrations include:

  * Home Assistant (via MQTT dashboard)
  * Node-RED (via MQTT flow)
  * Refoss Smart Energy Monitor (via native Home Assistant integration)

## 📁 Dashboard Directory

All dashboard files are located under the `dashboards/` folder.

## 🧩 Dashboard JSON Files

### Home Assistant

* **Path:** `dashboards/home_assistant_mqtt.json`
* **Description:** Imports into Home Assistant's MQTT dashboard to visualize Victron Smart device data.
* 📝 *Comment inside JSON marks where to replace MAC address.*

### Node-RED

* **Path:** `dashboards/nodered_victron_flow.json`
* **Description:** Full Node-RED flow to subscribe to Victron MQTT topics and build your own dashboard or automations.

> Replace MAC addresses or topic filters as needed inside these files. Look for comment markers `# REPLACE_ME`.

## 🔧 Setup

### Step 1: Clone This Repo

```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/curtalfrey/victron-ble2mqtt-integration.git
cd victron-ble2mqtt-integration
```

### Step 2: Edit `user_settings.py`


## Configuration

To get started, copy the example user settings file and customize it for your setup:

```bash
cp setup/user_settings.example.py victron_ble2mqtt/user_settings.py
```


```bash
nano setup/user_settings.py
```

Make sure to:

* Replace MAC addresses with your actual Victron device MACs
* Modify MQTT settings if needed

### Step 3: Configure `victron_ble2mqtt.service`

```bash
sudo cp setup/victron_ble2mqtt.service /etc/systemd/system/victron_ble2mqtt.service
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable victron_ble2mqtt.service
sudo systemctl start victron_ble2mqtt.service
```

### Step 4: Import Dashboards

* For Home Assistant, use the GUI to import `home_assistant_mqtt.json`
* For Node-RED, open the Node-RED UI and import `nodered_victron_flow.json` via the editor

## ✅ Fix for Common `user_settings.toml` Error

If `user_settings.toml` is not being loaded or is causing errors, skip it completely and use `user_settings.py`. This repo provides a verified working `user_settings.py` that eliminates TOML-related issues.

## 🔌 Refoss Smart Energy Monitor Integration

**Supported models:**

* Refoss Smart Energy Monitor EM06 (firmware v2.3.8+)
* Refoss Smart Energy Monitor EM16 (firmware v3.1.7+)

**Integration steps:**

1. Ensure the Refoss device is on the same LAN as your Home Assistant instance.
2. In Home Assistant, go to **Settings → Devices & Services → Add Integration → Refoss**.
3. Home Assistant will auto-discover the device and create energy monitoring entities (e.g., current, voltage, power per channel).
4. These entities can be used in dashboards and automations, combined with Victron data.

> 📝 Refoss integration is entirely local and does not rely on cloud services.



## 📌 Keywords for Searchability

```
victron-ble2mqtt not working
victron user_settings.toml error
victron_ble2mqtt.service fix
victron ble mqtt node-red
victron mqtt home assistant
refoss smart energy home assistant local
refoss em06 mqtt integration
victron ble2mqtt raspberry pi setup
victron smartshunt mqtt example
victron mppt mqtt dashboard
victron mqtt integration node-red home assistant
victron ble2mqtt user_settings.py example
victron mqtt troubleshooting guide
refoss em16 energy monitor local integration
refoss home assistant no cloud
victron refoss energy dashboard
combine victron and refoss in home assistant
victron ble2mqtt systemd config error
victron ble2mqtt service not starting
```

## 🔐 Notes on Privacy

* All user-specific info like usernames have been scrubbed.
* Replace any placeholders with your actual values before deploying.

---

### Contributions Welcome

Submit a PR if you'd like to share other dashboards (e.g., for Grafana, InfluxDB, etc.)

---

© 2025 Curt Alfrey | [alfaqd.com](https://alfaqd.com)
